# Load Balancer vs Reverse Proxy
## Reverse Proxy
A reverse proxy is a machine that acts as a gateway to machines that sit behind it. For instance, most popular websites have multiple servers running to satisfy billions of requests per day. These servers are connected to a reverse proxy, and this makes the clients connect to the reverse proxy, and the reverse proxy connects to one of the servers that it is connected to. Reverse proxy provides **improved security and isolation** since no client is allowed to directly talk to the application servers; all must go through the reverse proxy, providing the application servers with isolation and a layer of protection from the Internet. Clients also benefit from having **a single entry point** to use services. Clients do not have to worry about whether they should connect to Server 1 or Server 2; they simply connect to the reverse proxy, and it reroutes the requests to available servers. Reverse proxies are also **useful for AB testing (canary deployment)**. By adding a routing algorithm, the reverse proxy can route certain percentage of clients to connect to a beta server and the rest to production server.

## Load Balancer
**A reverse proxy can also be used for load balancing; in this case, it is named a load balancer.** The job of the load balancer is to even out the load among the connected servers to prevent a single server from being overwhelmed with processes. In order to efficiently do so, **load balancers have metadata about the servers**. There are various load balancing algorithms. **Round robin** assigns a client to a server, and the next client to the next server, and so on - like the name suggests. This may work, but can be a poor way of distributing load evenly since events like server disconnect and server outages can upset the balance of load among servers. **Dynamic load balancing algorithms** allow the load balancer to communicate with the servers and get information about their load, connection status, and other metadata that can help with making a good load balancing decision.
